🧩 ADVANCED PROBLEM SET (Progressive Difficulty)

Each question blends core Java, design patterns, system design, and distributed infra concepts — all in an LLD-to-HLD escalation format.

1️⃣ API Gateway & Microservice Adapter (Adapter Pattern + AWS + Spring Boot)

Goal: Design an API Gateway that connects multiple microservices with different response formats.

Requirements:

Gateway receives requests from clients (JSON/XML).

Uses Adapter pattern to normalize data from different downstream services (e.g., AuthService, ProductService).

Add rate limiting using Redis.

Use AWS Lambda to simulate one downstream service.

Add logging via an asynchronous logger (ExecutorService or CompletableFuture).

👉 Why useful: You’ll understand Adapter + async communication + API normalization in distributed systems.
Core Topics: Adapter pattern, CompletableFuture, Redis, AWS Lambda, REST design.

2️⃣ Payment Gateway with Dynamic Fees (Decorator Pattern + Strategy Pattern + Kafka)

Goal: Build a Payment processing pipeline.

Requirements:

Base PaymentProcessor handles basic card payments.

Add decorators for:

Logging

Fee calculation (country-based)

Fraud check

Use Kafka to queue transactions for asynchronous processing.

Store processed transactions in MySQL.

Introduce database versioning for schema changes (e.g., Flyway or Liquibase migrations).

👉 Why useful: Deep dive into Decorator pattern, async Kafka-based processing, and resilient transaction flow.
Core Topics: Decorator, Kafka producers/consumers, MySQL schema design, idempotency.

3️⃣ Smart Content Caching Layer (Proxy Pattern + Redis + ElasticSearch)

Goal: Build a system that fetches data from ES but caches frequently accessed content in Redis.

Requirements:

Client fetches product details.

Proxy checks Redis first.

If cache miss → fetch from ES, store in Redis.

Implement TTL-based cache eviction.

Add metrics to monitor cache hit/miss (use AtomicInteger or Prometheus simulation).

👉 Why useful: Core Proxy + caching concept + ES + Redis integration.
Core Topics: Proxy pattern, caching, Redis TTL, ES indexing, metrics & observability.

4️⃣ Hierarchical Organization Management (Composite Pattern + SQL)

Goal: Design an organization structure with departments and employees.

Requirements:

Implement Composite pattern to represent departments containing employees or sub-departments.

Store hierarchy in MySQL using adjacency list or nested set model.

Write SQL queries to fetch full hierarchy (recursively).

Add REST APIs to query and update hierarchy.

👉 Why useful: Combines LLD (Composite) + database schema design + recursion + REST.
Core Topics: Composite pattern, MySQL recursion (CTE), API design.

5️⃣ Cloud Infrastructure Provisioning System (Facade Pattern + AWS + Terraform Simulation)

Goal: Design a simplified AWS provisioning system.

Requirements:

Create a Facade that orchestrates:

EC2 (compute)

S3 (storage)

RDS (database)

Each subsystem is a separate class.

Add concurrency: provisioning multiple services in parallel using CompletableFuture.

Log results to a central dashboard (simulated DB).

👉 Why useful: Facade pattern + multithreading + cloud API abstraction.
Core Topics: Facade, CompletableFuture, AWS SDK simulation, concurrency.

6️⃣ User Session Manager (Flyweight Pattern + Redis + Locking)

Goal: Design a lightweight session management system.

Requirements:

Use Flyweight pattern to share session objects (same user attributes).

Store session state in Redis with expiry.

Handle concurrent session creation using ReentrantLock.

Add cleanup thread to evict expired sessions.

👉 Why useful: Demonstrates memory optimization, Redis session store, concurrency.
Core Topics: Flyweight pattern, Redis expiry, locks, JVM memory management.

7️⃣ Video Streaming Platform (Adapter + Proxy + Facade + Kafka + CDN)

Goal: Simulate Netflix-like video delivery.

Requirements:

Clients request videos through a Facade.

Adapter handles different encoding formats (H.264, AV1).

Proxy layer caches chunks (simulate CDN).

Kafka pipeline streams viewing analytics asynchronously.

Store view logs in ElasticSearch for analytics dashboard.

👉 Why useful: End-to-end real-world design combining multiple patterns + streaming systems.
Core Topics: Adapter + Proxy + Facade, Kafka streams, ES indexing, scalable video delivery.

8️⃣ Distributed Analytics Pipeline (Flyweight + Kafka + ES + AWS S3)

Goal: Design an analytics engine like Google Analytics.

Requirements:

Multiple clients send event data to Kafka.

Aggregator consumes events → stores summaries in ES.

Large raw data dumps go to AWS S3.

Use Flyweight pattern to reuse metric object templates.

👉 Why useful: Introduces scalable analytics with Kafka, ES, S3, Flyweight pattern.
Core Topics: Kafka streams, ES queries, Flyweight, S3 integration, batch vs stream.

9️⃣ Online Stock Portfolio Tracker (Decorator + Observer + Redis + WebSocket)

Goal: Real-time portfolio tracking system.

Requirements:

Each user observes price updates via Observer pattern.

Use Decorator for notification enhancement (SMS + Email).

Cache prices in Redis for fast lookups.

Push updates to UI via WebSocket.

👉 Why useful: Reactive architecture, Observer + Decorator, Redis pub/sub.
Core Topics: Observer, Decorator, Redis pub/sub, WebSocket, real-time systems.

🔟 Kubernetes Job Controller (Proxy + Mediator + AWS EKS Simulation)

Goal: Simulate how K8s schedules and manages pods.

Requirements:

Mediator coordinates pods, nodes, and job queues.

Proxy pattern simulates communication between nodes.

Redis distributed lock ensures one leader scheduler.

Expose metrics to Prometheus (simulate thread-safe metric updates).

👉 Why useful: Realistic distributed coordination system, like Kubernetes controller manager.
Core Topics: Mediator, Proxy, Redis locks, distributed coordination, leader election.

⚙️ Bonus: 3 HLD-Level System Design Problems (for SDE-2+)
A. “Design a Distributed Logging System (Kafka + ES + S3)”

Services write logs → Kafka

Consumers → ES (real-time search) + S3 (archival)

Add sampling + retention policies.

B. “Design WhatsApp Backend (Redis + Kafka + Sharding + Consistency)”

Chat messages stored in Redis (short-term) + Cassandra/MySQL (long-term)

Kafka for message delivery

Use consistent hashing for chat room sharding.

C. “Design an AWS CloudWatch Clone”

Metrics ingestion via Kafka

Time-series DB for storage

Alerts with Redis rate-limiting

Dashboard querying via ES.

🧠 Core Java Topics You’ll Cover Along the Way

Concurrency: ExecutorService, CompletableFuture, Locks, BlockingQueue

JVM: Memory model, GC, thread pools

Data structures: ConcurrentHashMap, LinkedHashMap (LRU), PriorityBlockingQueue

I/O: NIO channels, Streams API

Testing: JUnit5, Mockito, concurrent tests

Would you like me to now:

🧱 Create the next sheet (like your Mediator one) for Structural Patterns (Adapter → Facade) with full details — “Why useful”, “Requirements”, “Tech to include”, “Core focus”?

Or 🧩 start with Problem #1 — API Gateway (Adapter Pattern) and give you a full Java class design roadmap (like what classes, interfaces, async flow, Redis role, etc.) so you can start implementing it?







EXTENDED ADVANCED PROBLEM SET — “Spring + Java Mastery” (18 PROBLEMS TOTAL)

11️⃣ Paginated Search API with Dynamic Filters (Spring Boot + JPA + CriteriaBuilder)
Goal: Build a search API for cars that supports dynamic filtering and pagination.
Requirements:


Endpoint: /cars/search?page=1&size=10&make=Toyota&priceRange=10k-20k


Use Spring Data Pageable and JPA CriteriaBuilder.


Support sorting by price, name, or year.


Add caching for frequent filters using Redis.


Add total record count and metadata in the response.


👉 Why useful: This covers API design, pagination, filtering, and repository customization.
Core Topics: Pagination, JPA CriteriaBuilder, DTO projection, Redis caching.

12️⃣ Employee Management API with Validation + AOP Logging (Spring Boot + Hibernate Validator)
Goal: Create CRUD APIs for employee management.
Requirements:


Use @Valid annotations and custom validator for email format.


Apply AOP logging to log input/output of all service methods.


Global exception handler with custom ApiError response.


Add PUT API with partial update using @PatchMapping.


👉 Why useful: Standard Spring Boot interview task for controller-service flow + clean code practices.
Core Topics: AOP, @ControllerAdvice, Validation, Logging.

13️⃣ Product Inventory API with Optimistic Locking (Spring Boot + JPA + @Version)
Goal: Design a product stock update API safe for concurrent updates.
Requirements:


Use @Version for optimistic locking in JPA.


Add retry logic using @Retryable or custom retry with CompletableFuture.


Log failed updates asynchronously.


Use REST endpoint: PUT /products/{id}/stock.


👉 Why useful: Concurrency control & transaction safety in distributed systems.
Core Topics: Concurrency, transactions, retries, async logging.

14️⃣ Lambda-driven Data Transformer (Java Streams + Functional Interfaces)
Goal: Transform a list of orders to order summaries using lambdas.
Requirements:


Use Stream.map(), filter(), and Collectors.groupingBy().


Add a functional interface DataTransformer<T, R>.


Handle null safety and logging for skipped items.


👉 Why useful: Real Java functional programming usage in enterprise code.
Core Topics: Streams, Optional, Lambdas, Functional Interfaces.

15️⃣ API Rate Limiting + Circuit Breaker (Resilience4j + Redis + Spring Boot)
Goal: Create a resilient service that limits request rate and handles downstream failures.
Requirements:


Apply Redis-based rate limiter per user.


Integrate Resilience4j CircuitBreaker to fallback when a downstream API fails.


Async logs via CompletableFuture.


👉 Why useful: Combines resilience, Redis, and async patterns.
Core Topics: Circuit Breaker, Resilience4j, Async patterns, Redis.

16️⃣ Pagination + Cursor-Based Scrolling API (Spring Boot + MongoDB)
Goal: Implement a scalable pagination API for large datasets.
Requirements:


Use cursor-based pagination instead of offset pagination.


MongoDB query with _id as cursor.


Response includes next/previous page tokens.


👉 Why useful: Real-world pattern for infinite scrolling / feed APIs.
Core Topics: Pagination, MongoDB, cursor-based APIs.

17️⃣ Event-Driven Email Notification System (Spring Events + Kafka)
Goal: Send asynchronous notifications when new users register.
Requirements:


Use ApplicationEventPublisher and @EventListener.


Kafka topic for scalable email processing.


Add retry and DLQ (Dead Letter Queue).


Store delivery logs in MySQL.


👉 Why useful: Spring events + Kafka = powerful async microservice communication.
Core Topics: Events, Kafka, Async processing, DLQ.

18️⃣ API Response Wrapper + Exception Strategy (Spring Boot)
Goal: Standardize all API responses and exceptions.
Requirements:


Define generic wrapper:
class ApiResponse<T> {
    private T data;
    private String message;
    private int statusCode;
}



Handle exceptions with @ControllerAdvice.


Integrate with Swagger/OpenAPI documentation.


👉 Why useful: Standard pattern for clean API design & interviews.
Core Topics: Exception handling, ResponseEntity, Swagger, JSON structure.

19️⃣ File Upload + AWS S3 Integration (Spring Boot + Multipart + AWS SDK)
Goal: Design REST API to upload/download files.
Requirements:


Use @PostMapping("/upload") for Multipart upload.


Store file in S3 and metadata in MySQL.


Add presigned URL support for secure downloads.


👉 Why useful: Covers multipart handling, AWS SDK, and data integrity.
Core Topics: AWS SDK, file streams, metadata persistence.

20️⃣ Bulk Import API with Parallel Processing (ExecutorService + Batch)
Goal: Design an API to import 10k+ users from a CSV.
Requirements:


Read CSV in chunks.


Use ExecutorService for multi-threaded batch inserts.


Track failed records and log them.


Expose progress status via /import/status.


👉 Why useful: Large data handling, multithreading, API design.
Core Topics: ExecutorService, batch insert, REST monitoring.

🧱 Optional Add-ons for Real Depth:
If you want even more coverage, we can add:


21️⃣ GraphQL API design with pagination + filtering.


22️⃣ Reactive API using WebFlux + Mono/Flux.


23️⃣ Distributed cache invalidation across microservices (Redis pub/sub).


24️⃣ Lambda expression–based comparator sorting challenges.


25️⃣ Write unit tests with Mockito + concurrency tests for async methods.



⚙️ Suggestion: Next Step
Would you like me to now:
1️⃣ Create a full roadmap & class-level breakdown for Problem #11 — “Paginated Search API with Dynamic Filters” (so you can start coding it in Spring Boot),
OR
2️⃣ Generate a consolidated sheet (like your Mediator one) — a “Structural Patterns + API Design” master sheet with short summaries for each problem (why, tech stack, learning outcome, etc.)?
That way, you can follow it like a syllabus to build confidence in writing Java + Spring Boot code.